The hottest day of the summer so far was drawing to a close
and a drowsy silence lay over the large, square houses of Privet
Drive. Cars that were usually gleaming stood dusty in their drives
and lawns that were once emerald green lay parched and yellowing;
the use of hosepipes had been banned due to drought. Deprived of
their usual car-washing and lawn-mowing pursuits, the inhabitants
of Privet Drive had retreated into the shade of their cool houses, windows
thrown wide in the hope of tempting in a nonexistent breeze.
The only person left outdoors was a teenage boy who was lying flat on
his back in a flower bed outside number four.
He was a skinny, black-haired, bespectacled boy who had the
pinched, slightly unhealthy look of someone who has grown a lot in a
short space of time. His jeans were torn and dirty, his T-shirt baggy
and faded, and the soles of his trainers were peeling away from the uppers.
Harry Potter’s appearance did not endear him to the neighbors,
who were the sort of people who thought scruffiness ought to be punishable
by law, but as he had hidden himself behind a large hydrangea
bush this evening he was quite invisible to passersby. In fact, the only way he would be spotted was if his Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia
stuck their heads out of the living room window and looked straight
down into the flower bed below.
On the whole, Harry thought he was to be congratulated on his
idea of hiding here. He was not, perhaps, very comfortable lying on
the hot, hard earth, but on the other hand, nobody was glaring at
him, grinding their teeth so loudly that he could not hear the news, or
shooting nasty questions at him, as had happened every time he had
tried sitting down in the living room and watching television with his
aunt and uncle.
Almost as though this thought had fluttered through the open window,
Vernon Dursley, Harry’s uncle, suddenly spoke. “Glad to see the
boy’s stopped trying to butt in. Where is he anyway?”
“I don’t know,” said Aunt Petunia unconcernedly. “Not in the
house.”
Uncle Vernon grunted.
“Watching the news . . .” he said scathingly. “I’d like to know what
he’s really up to. As if a normal boy cares what’s on the news — Dudley
hasn’t got a clue what’s going on, doubt he knows who the Prime
Minister is! Anyway, it’s not as if there’d be anything about his lot on
our news —”
“Vernon, shh!” said Aunt Petunia. “The window’s open!”
“Oh — yes — sorry, dear . . .”
The Dursleys fell silent. Harry listened to a jingle about Fruit ’N
Bran breakfast cereal while he watched Mrs. Figg, a batty, cat-loving
old lady from nearby Wisteria Walk, amble slowly past. She was
frowning and muttering to herself. Harry was very pleased that he was
concealed behind the bush; Mrs. Figg had recently taken to asking
him around for tea whenever she met him in the street. She had
rounded the corner and vanished from view before Uncle Vernon’s
voice floated out of the window again. “Dudders out for tea?”
“At the Polkisses’,” said Aunt Petunia fondly. “He’s got so many little
friends, he’s so popular . . .”
Harry repressed a snort with difficulty. The Dursleys really were astonishingly
stupid about their son, Dudley; they had swallowed all his
dim-witted lies about having tea with a different member of his gang
every night of the summer holidays. Harry knew perfectly well that
Dudley had not been to tea anywhere; he and his gang spent every
evening vandalizing the play park, smoking on street corners, and
throwing stones at passing cars and children. Harry had seen them at
it during his evening walks around Little Whinging; he had spent
most of the holidays wandering the streets, scavenging newspapers
from bins along the way.
The opening notes of the music that heralded the seven o’clock
news reached Harry’s ears and his stomach turned over. Perhaps
tonight — after a month of waiting — would be the night —
“Record numbers of stranded holidaymakers fill airports as the
Spanish baggage-handlers’ strike reaches its second week —”
“Give ’em a lifelong siesta, I would,” snarled Uncle Vernon over the
end of the newsreader’s sentence, but no matter: Outside in the flower
bed, Harry’s stomach seemed to unclench. If anything had happened,
it would surely have been the first item on the news; death and destruction
were more important than stranded holidaymakers. . . .
He let out a long, slow breath and stared up at the brilliant blue sky.
Every day this summer had been the same: the tension, the expectation,
the temporary relief, and then mounting tension again . . . and
always, growing more insistent all the time, the question of why nothing
had happened yet. . . .
He kept listening, just in case there was some small clue, not
recognized for what it really was by the Muggles — an unexplained
disappearance, perhaps, or some strange accident . . . but the baggage-handlers’ strike was followed by news on the drought in the
Southeast (“I hope he’s listening next door!” bellowed Uncle Vernon,
“with his sprinklers on at three in the morning!”); then a helicopter
that had almost crashed in a field in Surrey, then a famous actress’s divorce
from her famous husband (“as if we’re interested in their sordid
affairs,” sniffed Aunt Petunia, who had followed the case obsessively
in every magazine she could lay her bony hands on).
Harry closed his eyes against the now blazing evening sky as the
newsreader said, “And finally, Bungy the budgie has found a novel
way of keeping cool this summer. Bungy, who lives at the Five Feathers
in Barnsley, has learned to water-ski! Mary Dorkins went to find
out more. . . .”
Harry opened his eyes again. If they had reached water-skiing
budgerigars, there was nothing else worth hearing. He rolled cautiously
onto his front and raised himself onto his knees and elbows,
preparing to crawl out from under the window.
He had moved about two inches when several things happened in
very quick succession.
A loud, echoing crack broke the sleepy silence like a gunshot; a cat
streaked out from under a parked car and flew out of sight; a shriek, a
bellowed oath, and the sound of breaking china came from the Dursleys’
living room, and as though Harry had been waiting for this
signal, he jumped to his feet, at the same time pulling from the waistband
of his jeans a thin wooden wand as if he were unsheathing a
sword. But before he could draw himself up to full height, the top of
his head collided with the Dursleys’ open window, and the resultant
crash made Aunt Petunia scream even louder.
Harry felt as if his head had been split in two; eyes streaming, he
swayed, trying to focus on the street and spot the source of the noise,
but he had barely staggered upright again when two large purple
hands reached through the open window and closed tightly around
his throat.